---
layout: post
title: Will it Blend?
subtitle: Rendering geometric noise with Blender
photo: plexus_700x420.jpg
photo-alt: example cover photo
category: [Visualisation]
tags: [Blender]
---
Some notes on Blender rendering.

<hr />

# Realtime rendering

1. Top Bar, third box, select 'Cycles Render'
2. In bottom bar, next to 'Object Mode', click the white circle icon and select 'Rendered' in the viewport shading
3. In the Right bar under Render Select the device to GPU Compute to enable GPU rendering

- Use planes with the emissive material as lamps instead of lamp


Tab = Edit mode
s = scale

Enter edit mode and right click object, in left hand tool bar are options to apply to the object

# Make a fractal


- Add a plane
- Subdivide (Under Add) with number of cuts > 1 and Fractal > 0. Along Normal = 1 ensures that the distortions are only in the direction normal to the plane.
https://docs.blender.org/manual/en/latest/modeling/meshes/editing/subdividing/subdivide.html
- Can also Randomise afterwords (Mesh Tools) to make spikey structures.

# Selection
Use the circle tool (c), and click to select. You can change the size with the scroll wheel. Alternatively use box select (b)

# Shortcuts

|key | action |
|----|--------|
b | Draw box to select.
Numpad - 0 | Move to camera view.
Shift-f | Move camera. Use WASD and shift to speed up.
Shift-A | Add object
Shift-d | Duplicate object
Shift-Z | Render preview
Esc | Exit render view 
r - x - 180 | Make selected object face directly down

#Materials
Bottom Left bar Menu > Node Editor
Bottom bar, Add > Shader > Diffuse
Hard plastic: https://blender.stackexchange.com/questions/61201/how-to-create-hard-plastic-material/61216
Waxy plastic: https://blender.stackexchange.com/questions/53323/create-a-hard-plastic-material-node-setup-in-blender-and-a-bump-mapping/79015
PBR - Principled shaders give most realistic results


#Rendering
Change quality In the right bar render menu under Sampling > samples > Render. Default = 128, more samples gives better results but takes longer.

#Improve rendering performance
In right bar render menu:

- Light paths > Min light bounces = 0, Max light bounces = 4
- Perfomance > Tile size = 256 x 256 (for GPU). If GPU usage is low for simple scenes, make as high as possible
- Reduce samples if no improvement for higher samples
- Enable no caustics 

# Denoising

- Improves performance by removing noise, reducing number of samples required for convergence. Can make image blurry, try with on and off.
- Right bar -> RenderLayers (next to render). go down to Denoising and tick the box.

# Replicate results
Wax images : fractal3.blend > 4k resolution > 150 samples > denoised = True. Rendering takes < 30s
Select Cycles Render (top bar) Hit Numpad-0 to select camera, shift-f to orient and then after selecting the view with left click, middle mouse, hit F12 to render, Esc to go back to 3d view. F3 to save the image.


Particles
---------

## Particles


- Select object and go to the particles tab in the right menu and click new. Under the Render option set size = 1
- Click play to see objects being emitted
- Shift-A add forcefield, adjust strength etc by going to the physics tab in the right menu
- Can turn off gravity of particles under the particles tab, Field Weights

Under the Render tab in the particles tab:
- To visualise halo particles, create a box that encloses the particles and add a material for the box. In the Node editor add Texture > Point density and Shader > emission
- Alternatively, reder as Object and set the Dupli object to the chosen object.

Refernces: 
- https://blender.stackexchange.com/questions/45481/halo-particles-dont-render-in-cycles
- https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Blender_3D:_Noob_to_Pro/Particle_Systems


# Todo
- Particles: Photons = Glass, Energy = emissitivity, colour=Type
