---
layout: post
title: Altair
subtitle: Interactive plotting with Altair
photo: altair.jpg
photo-alt: Your mind on Latin
tags: [Altair, Python]
category: [Visualisation]
---

{%- include altair/altair.html -%}  % Include to render Altair plots

Python has a fantastic ecosystem of plotting libraries that enable analysts to explore and understand patterns in their data. The output however is typically static, making exploring multidimensional data difficult. Dynamic plotting libraries that enable the user to manipulate the quantities and selections of visualisations provide a powerful method to better explore their data.

[Altair](https://altair-viz.github.io/) is a python wrapper for [Vega](https://vega.github.io/vega/) that provides a wide range of plotting functions using a JSON data format. Altair natively supports Pandas DataFrames, making it easy to intergrate into a standard Python analysis. Of particular interest is the support of interactive plotting with a webbrowser or Jupyter notebook, which will be the focus of this post.

### Getting started

First install Altair and the corresponding Vega datasets using your favourate package manager. For example by pip:
```
pip install altair vega_datasets
```

or if you prefer conda:
```
conda install -c conda-forge altair vega_datasets
```

You can then import Altair in your Python projects via:

```python
import altair as alt
```
where by convention we use the alias `alt`.



### Exploring the Iris dataset

A common test dataset is Fisher's Iris dataset, a simple multivariate measurement of the dimensions of the **sepals** and **petals** of three Iris species which we will use to demonstrate the functionality of Altair.


#### Getting the data

 Altair comes bundled with sample datasets from Vega which can be used to perform simple analyses for demonstration. You can import these by:
  ``` python
 from vega_datasets import data
 ```

To load the `iris` dataset:
```python 
df = data.iris()
```

This is a Pandas DataFrame with four numerical **petal** and **sepal** measurements and a **species** category.
```python
>>> df.head()

   petalLength  petalWidth  sepalLength  sepalWidth species
0          1.4         0.2          5.1         3.5  setosa
1          1.4         0.2          4.9         3.0  setosa
2          1.3         0.2          4.7         3.2  setosa
3          1.5         0.2          4.6         3.1  setosa
4          1.4         0.2          5.0         3.6  setosa
```


#### Static plotting

The core object for plotting in Altair is the `Chart` object, which takes as input a Pandas DataFrame of the plot data:

```python
import altair as alt
chart = alt.Chart(df)
```

The chart object instance will however will not generate plot output until properly configured. To achieve this, the `Chart` object utilises method chaining which enables complex plots to be built from the execution of a series of plotting functions. 

The core plotting functions are defined by the [`marks`](https://altair-viz.github.io/user_guide/marks.html) methods, which includes the point plot function `mark_points`. This is can then configured using `encode`. In the example below we make a static point plot of the Iris dataset using *petalLength* and *petalWidth* as the variables and colour by the Iris species.
```python 
chart = alt.Chart(source).mark_point().encode(
    x='petalLength',
    y='petalWidth',
    color='species'
)
```

To view the plot you then need to render the chart object, for plotting from a Python IDE use the `serve` method, which will open the plot in a new webbrowser:
```python 
chart.serve()
```
Note that the kernel will be busy whilst the chart is being displayed and must be interrupted to continue executing commands.

If using a Jupyter notebook you should instead use the `display` method:
```python 
chart.display()
```
or you can automatically render in a cell by not storing the chart as a variable: 
```python 
alt.Chart(source).mark_point().encode(
    x='petalLength',
    y='petalWidth',
    color='species'
)
```

This will generate the point plot below:

{%- include altair/iris_1.html -%}

You can save your plot either as an image or as HTML that you can embed in a webpage:
```python
chart.save('iris.png')  # Save as a png
chart.save('iris.html')  # Save as HTML
```



### Interactive plotting

One useful functionality if the `interactive` method, that enables panning and zooming of the plot area. This by itself is nothing special however when combined with linked plots, this enables the exploration of the dataset in a coordinated way. We can enrich our prior example with `repeat` and `interactive` methods to make an interactive pairplot:

```python
alt.Chart(source).mark_circle().encode(
    alt.X(alt.repeat("column"), type='quantitative'),
    alt.Y(alt.repeat("row"), type='quantitative'),
    color='species:N'
).properties(
    width=200,
    height=200
).repeat(
    row=['sepalLength', 'petalLength'],
    column=['sepalWidth', 'petalWidth']
).interactive()
```

Which makes the following output:

{%- include altair/iris_2.html -%}




### Brushes


- Brush/selection


```python
brush = alt.selection(type='interval', resolve='global')

base = alt.Chart(source).mark_point().encode(
    y='sepalLength',
    color=alt.condition(brush, 'species', alt.ColorValue('gray')),
).add_selection(
    brush
).properties(
    width=250,
    height=250
)

points = base.encode(x='petalLength') | base.encode(x='petalWidth') | base.encode(x='sepalWidth') 


bars = alt.Chart(source).mark_bar().encode(
    y='species:N',
    color='species:N',
    x='count(species):Q'
).transform_filter(
    brush
).properties(
    width=800,
    height=100
)

points & bars
```

Which produces:
{%- include altair/iris_3.html -%}


### Plotting big data

When plotting with large datasets care should be taken to consider what plots are appropriate. Plotting a large selection of data can make the browser unresponsive or cause Jupyter notebooks to inflate in size. 

To prevent this, by default Altair will restrict the maximum number of rows that can be plotted to 5000. If this is to restrictive, you can disable this limitation by calling:

```python
alt.data_transformers.disable_max_rows()
```

When running on a Jupyter notebook, all data that is loaded will be embedded. If you find this is making your notebooks filesize large you can specify that the data be stored in a seperate JSON file, keeping your notebook size small:

```python
alt.data_transformers.enable('json') 
```

Alternatively, you can source your data via a [URL](https://altair-viz.github.io/user_guide/faq.html#passing-data-by-url) to avoid any embedding.


Putting this together, we can make an interactive plot of a large dataset using a Jupyter notebook:

```python
import altair as alt
alt.data_transformers.disable_max_rows()
alt.data_transformers.enable('json') 
```

### Futher reading

- Checkout more Altair examples in the [Jupyter notebooks examples](https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/catana-research/JupyterNotebooks/blob/master/Visualisation/Altair.ipynb).
- Altair has a wide range of [examples](https://altair-viz.github.io/gallery/index.html).

